The automatic declaration
 
For more than 10 years, the tax administration has been preparing your income tax return with information of which it is aware (family expenses, amount of wages, pensions, allowances, unemployment benefits, etc.).
 
Now, the automatic return is set up to simplify your life by allowing you, if possible, to no longer file your return, as long as the administration has all the information necessary to tax your income.
How do I know if I benefit from automatic reporting?
 
The automatic tax return is available to tax households that were taxed last year only on income pre-filled by the administration.
 
If you reported online last year: you will receive an information email about this new device, informing you that the summary of the known information of the administration is available, for verification, in your particular space;
 
If you filed a paper return in 2023, you will receive your new tax return in an appropriate format by mail, along with documents that show you this new form of return.
 
Good to know:
 
Users who were eligible for automatic reporting in 2023 but who are no longer eligible in 2024 will be informed in mid-April by e-mail that they are required to file a tax return this year.
How exactly does it work?
 
If you are eligible, you must check the information that the administration brings to your knowledge:
 
If all the information is correct and complete, you have nothing else to do. Your income tax return will be automatically validated;
 
If certain items need to be completed or changed (address, family status, amount of income and expenses, eligible expenses for reduction/tax credit, option to choose taxation on the scale of income from movable capital...), then you will have to complete and sign your income tax return as usual.
 
Important:
 
If you changed your address in 2023, consider replacing the old one with the new one, to avoid tax errors.
But how can I be sure not to be considered as failing if I don't file?
 
You have been informed by DGFiP (by e-mail or mail accompanying your statement) that you are affected by the automatic declaration.
 
If, after verification, you consider that the known information of the administration is correct and exhaustive then you have nothing to do: they will be automatically validated without any particular action on your part! And you will of course not be considered as failing.
 
If, on the contrary, some of your information has changed (address, family status, amount of income and expenses, expenses eligible for reduction/tax credit, option to choose taxation on the scale of income from movable capital...), then you will have to complete and sign your income tax return as usual. However, births that have been previously reported in your "Manage my levy at source" space will be included in your automatic return.
I am eligible for automatic reporting and I want to change wrong/incomplete wages or mention RI-CI
 
You are eligible for automatic reporting and after checking the pre-filled information you want to make a change to it.
 
For this purpose, if you wish to modify or complete the information submitted, you can file online and complete or correct the pre-filled information, or use your tax return in paper format, as usual.
Does the automatic reporting device only apply to online reporting? Does it also apply to paper reporting?
 
The automatic declaration refers to the online declaration and the paper declaration.
 
If you are eligible for the automatic declaration, you have been informed by the DGFiP (by e-mail or mail accompanying your declaration).
If after verification you consider that the information known to the administration is correct and exhaustive, it will be automatically validated without any particular action on your part and will be used to calculate the balance of your tax, if any.
 
Otherwise, a declaration (on-line or paper) must be filed in the usual manner.
 
How to report your income
 
If you are not eligible for the automatic declaration this year, or if you are eligible and you have to correct or complete the information submitted by the administration, you must file a declaration: make it online!
 
This statement has been adapted to the implementation of the source levy and you can now find the details of all your samples and check them.
 
Video Tutorial "The Income Tax Return"
Check your pre-filled information
 
- Automatic declaration or standard declaration, it is necessary for you to ensure that the information pre-filled by the administration (taxable income and levies at source) is correct.
 
To do this, use the annual summary that may appear on your December 2023 salary or pension statement or on a specific document made available by your income payers.
In the absence of an annual summary, we invite you to make the total of your taxable and sourced income from your bulletins of the year.
 
You can also find information about your source sampling in your particular space under "Manage my source sampling".
Important:
 
In case of a move, check your address on January 1 on your tax return to avoid tax errors.
The declaration in source sampling mode
 
You will find on your income tax return details of all the deductions made at source in 2023 so that you can verify them and, in cases where this information is not accurate, modify them:
 
• adding a line of "income / withholding tax" amounts when you do not find the income and withholding tax information at the source of a tax payer;
 
- modification of an amount: this allows you to correct the amount of income and/or withholding tax presented by the administration;
 
If you dispute that a collector has paid you taxable income (and deducted at source), you should delete a line of "income/receipt at source" amounts.
 
I have a balance to pay: why and when?
 
The income tax return you make in 2024 allows you to take stock of your 2023 tax situation. Your return allows you to calculate your tax and, once you have deducted the amounts you have already paid with the 2023 source tax, three situations can arise:
 
You get a refund, for example, if you were too much deducted in 2023 compared to the amount of your tax;
 
You have nothing to pay;
 
If, for example, you did not pay enough in 2023, you received an overpayment or tax credit in January 2024 or you did not change your source tax rate in 2023 as a result of an increase in income.
 
If you receive a refund, the refund will be refunded directly to you from the known bank account of the DGFiP, if you have communicated one, if not by mail with a cheque to be cashed directly from your bank.
 
If you have an amount of tax to pay, it will be deducted from the bank account you have provided to the DGFiP (consultable / editable in your particular space under the heading "Managing my levy at source"):
 
In a single levy on 27 September 2024 if the amount is less than €300;
In four monthly levies (September to December) if the amount is more than €300.
 
This tax return will also update your source tax rate for September 2024.
The calendar
 
The online reporting service will be open until the following departmental deadlines:
 
Thursday
23 MAY
at the latest (23:59)
 
For departments
Nos 01 to 19
and non-residents
 
Thursday
- 30 MAY
at the latest (23:59)
 
 
For departments
Nos 20 to 54
 
Thursday
JUNE 6
at the latest (23:59)
 
 
For departments
Nos 55 to 976
 
The paper return must be filed no later than Tuesday, May 21, 2024, at midnight, including for French residents abroad.
How do I report online?
 
When declaring online, it is the simplest, most flexible, quick and reliable way to report your income. Simply log in to your particular space and let yourself be guided.
 
If your principal residence is equipped with internet access, your tax return must be made via the Internet. However, if you feel you are unable to do so, you can continue to use a paper return.
 
To connect to your particular space, you must have your tax number and password.
 
With FranceConnect, you can also log in using one of the "digital identities" partners: impots.gouv.fr, La Poste or MobileConnect and me.
Have you not yet created your space?
 
You'll see, it's easy. To do this, you only need to gather three elements:
 
Then you just have to create your personal space and choose a password:
 
Create my space
• Reporting online is also the right to error
 
After signing your online declaration, you can still change it if you wish, up to the deadline for reporting.
After receiving your tax notice, you will still be able to use "Corriger mon déclaration en ligne" in your particular area, from the opening of the service until mid-December.
What if I declare for the very first time?
 
If you are 20 years of age or older and you were connected to your parents' tax home last year, you had to receive a specific mail indicating your 3 identifiers to create your own particular space on impots.gouv.fr and declare online.
 
If you can't find it again, contact your Public Finance Centre. You can then report your income via the internet, smartphone or tablet.
 
If you do not have an online access number or a reference tax income, you cannot report online this year. You will therefore have to send your tax department a paper return (year 2024), which will soon be downloadable from the search engine of the website impots.gouv.fr.
Have you recently arrived on the territory and do not have a tax number yet?
 
You can apply via our Contact page > Personal > Access to your particular area > I don't have a tax number.
Did you receive an allowance from your employer and/or incur expenses for telework at home in 2023?
 
Find out how to declare them.
Do you have a vehicle and want to deduct your kilometric costs?
 
When you choose to deduct the actual costs, the expense of your kilometric fee is taken into account. This option is more interesting for the calculation of your tax when the actual expenses you deduct are greater than the 10% flat-rate deduction.
 
To find out if you have an interest in deducting your actual expenses this year on your 2023 income tax return, you can use the kilometric cost simulator.
The estimated cost of your kilometric costs is to be added to your other actual costs.
 
Accessing the simulator
Why should I continue to declare despite the installation of the source sampling?
 
You have to keep making your return every year because the tax administration does not always have all of your up-to-date information (e.g. property income, or maintenance payments), so it allows you to regularize your situation for the previous year by taking into account all of your income but also your expenses (gifts, expenses eligible for tax credits, etc.).
 
In the majority of cases, if your income has not changed or if you have updated your situation over the water on your personal space, it does not change anything, you may not have to pay any more. However, if you have experienced an increase in income but have not reported it, you will surely have to pay a remainder.
 
In some cases, your income tax return may also allow you to receive a refund (for example, if you are eligible for a tax credit). This income tax return will also allow you to update your source tax rate for September, so that it is as appropriate as possible to your situation.
When will the sampling rate be taken into account? Can I now modulate?
 
The time to take into account your new source collection rate is 1 to 2 months.
 
As a result of your income tax return, a new rate will be calculated and will be applied as of September. It takes into account the items you have reported. This rate is indicated to you once your online return is signed (or mentioned on your automatic return if you do not correct anything).
 
If you feel that this rate is not appropriate for your current situation, you can adjust it. Click on "Yes, I want to adjust my levy to the source" at the end of your income tax return.
If I checked the box "receive my return", will I receive my paper return?
 
If you reported on paper in 2023 or 2022, your paper return will be sent to you between April 13 and the end of April 2024, if you have not checked the "zero paper" option on your online space.
 
If your principal residence is equipped with internet access, your tax return must be made online. However, if you feel you are unable to do so, you can continue to use a paper return.
The box 3916 "Keeping an Account Abroad" is pre-checked on my return. Yet, I don't have an account abroad, what to do?
 
Box 3916 "Maintaining an Account Abroad" may already be checked when you receive your return.
 
If you do not have an account abroad, this box may still be checked, if, for example, you have a Paypal account (dominated in Luxembourg) backed by your bank card to pay for online purchases.
 
If box 3916 is pre-checked while you do not have an account abroad or a life insurance contract, and the amounts collected through your Paypal account do not exceed € 10,000 per year, you can uncheck this box. To do so:
 
From the beginning of your online return: on the income selection screen, click on "Annex returns", then uncheck the box corresponding to return No. 3916 "Report by a resident of an account opened outside France". Validate.
If you notice this pre-check at the end of your return, you will not be able to validate your return. Instead of returning at the beginning of your return, click on the "Selection of the tax return and schedules" link in the menu on the left of your screen. Then click on "Send Returns".
 
This will allow you to uncheck print No. 3916.
Can my Public Service House, or my France Service, request information from the Public Finance Centre in my place?
 
The officers of the MSAP and France Services are trained in general questions that you might ask them. They can also assist you in your online procedures, or direct you to the competent department.
 
On the other hand, the public finance centre will not issue personal information directly to the agent of France Service. The agent can help you to make your request via the secure messaging of your particular area on impots.gouv.fr, or to make an appointment with the public finance centre responsible for your file.
What is the deadline for correcting my statement?
If you declare online:
 
During the reporting period up to the deadline of your department (see online reporting schedule): you can make as many corrective statements as you wish. To do so, go back to your particular space and click on "Access the online return" and then "Corriger".
 
If you are affected by the automatic return, you will be able to correct your return online, in the event that you have forgotten to amend or complete your return, throughout the reporting period.
 
Once your notice has been received or is available online, if you notice an error: you will be able to change or correct the items reported through the online correction service. For the 2023 income tax return, the service will be available in mid-August 2024 until mid-December 2024. After this date, you will no longer be able to change your return from the online correction service.
If you declare:
 
During the reporting period: you can change your income tax return by sending, up to the filing deadline, an amendment return containing all the entries concerning you, to the personal tax department on which you depend.
 
Once your notice is received, you can make a claim, which you can submit until December 31 of the second year following your return, either online from your Personal Space via secure courier or by mail to your Public Finance Centre.
 
For more information, see the section Personal > Preventing and resolving my difficulties; correcting my mistakes > I want to challenge a tax: I make a claim.
 
 
How do I contact us if you have problems with the internet?
If you have difficulty logging in on the Internet, you can get help completing your tax return.
By telephone:
 
From Monday to Friday, from 8:30 a.m. to 7 p.m., an agent from DGFiP will assist you in carrying out your most common procedures online at 0 809 401 401 (non-overtaxed call)
 
It is also possible to make a telephone appointment with our services, in order to avoid moving (section "contact" on impots.gouv.fr "Take a Rendez-Vous")
 
Finally, you can contact your personal tax department (contact information in the "contact" section on impots.gouv.fr) especially for questions relating to the calculation of your taxes.
In our many counters:
 
The DGFiP is continuing its transformation and is setting up a new outreach network (NRP) to strengthen its presence in the territories.
 
This new outreach network primarily concerns services in the departments (taxes for individuals and businesses, management and accounting of local authorities, land advertising, etc.) and aims to strengthen its presence and proximity to individuals, by increasing its presence in the municipalities by more than 40%.
 
In this way, the DGFIP will be even more accessible, everywhere and in as many places as possible.
France Services:
 
You can also find DGFIP agents in the France Services areas, but also by organising appointments or permanences in town halls, or by video conferencing.
 
Officers, with all the necessary tools, will be able to answer all user questions by having access to their files.
 
The France Services also offer support for people who are remote from digital technology. An animator guides users in their online approaches, according to their level of autonomy.
 
As of January 1st, there were more than 2,700 France Services labeled throughout the country.
 
 
Why didn't I receive a paper return by mail?
 
If you have opted for dematerialization or are a related major person (PMR) who filed a 2023 income tax return on your own behalf, you will not receive a paper return in 2024.
 
This development, which is part of the generalization of the online tax return (except in particular cases provided for by law and in particular in the absence of an internet connection), is also the translation of an eco-responsible approach of the tax administration.
 
This will save 250 tonnes of paper and plastic packaging each year by avoiding printing and sending more than 10 million declarations.
Good to know.
If you are in situations where you still need to print a paper return (such as if a relative or third party reported for you or if you are temporarily unable to complete an online procedure) or if you absolutely need to have a paper return issued, you will be able to obtain a return of your pre-filled return from your Public Finance Centre and, if necessary, the documents necessary for a paper deposit.
 
 
 
My income tax notice
What document will inform me of the amount of tax that I will pay or that will be returned to me? On what date?
In case of online reporting:
 
When reporting your income online, you can immediately dispose of a "Notice of Reportable Status to Income Tax" (ASDIR) indicating the amount of tax that will remain payable or the amount that will be refunded to you if applicable. Please note, this document does not constitute a tax notice.
 
You will receive your tax notice during the summer (on-line or in paper).
 
By then, if organizations ask you for your last tax notice, last year's tax notice based on the 2022 revenues should be provided.
 
If your tax home has an amount to pay, your notice will show the calculation of the remaining tax owing on your income of 2023, after charging the amounts of PAS (source levy) collected in 2023, and your tax reductions and credits, if any. This amount will be deducted as of September 2024. The date of the levy(s) will be specified on your tax notice.
 
If your taxation results in a refund, the refund will be made in the summer of 2024, directly to the bank account that you provided to us.
In the case of a paper declaration:
 
You will receive at your home, on or before the beginning of September 2024, a tax notice summarizing the amount you have to pay in respect of income tax and social contributions, or the amount you will be reimbursed if necessary.
 
This amount is calculated by the tax administration on the basis of the 2023 income tax return you subscribed in the spring of 2024.
What remedies do I have at the end of the tax notices?
 
If you notice an error or want to challenge the validity of your tax (on income, social or local taxes...), you can make a claim directly online from your Personal account on impots.gouv.fr via your secure mail, and follow the processing.
 
If you file a claim with the tax authority, you are not exempt from paying the corresponding tax, but you can apply for a stay of payment.
I have not filed an income tax return, will I have my opinion?
 
Any person taxable on income tax, regardless of his or her nationality, must file a return every year and renew it even if his or her income has not changed from the previous year. An income tax notice is made available to all taxpayers who file a return, whether or not they have an amount of tax payable.
 
The implementation of the automatic declaration for certain users does not call into question the responsibility of the user, as the absence of a deposit is valid for the validation of the elements contained in the automatic declaration.
 
If you are eligible for automatic reporting, you must verify that all information brought to your attention by the Tax Administration is correct. If it is, you have nothing to do.
 
And if you are not eligible for the automatic declaration, the declaration must be made in the usual manner.
 
Thus, if you do not file your return on time you will not get a tax notice, and you will have to regularize your situation with the administration.
Why can I have an outstanding amount or a refund when I am charged monthly?
 
Because of the introduction of the levy at source, you pay your taxes as you collect your income, in the form of a levy by your income payer (employer, pension fund, etc.) or by way of advance payments made by the tax administration from your bank account (if you collect property income, for example).
 
In the spring of 2024, you reported your previous year's income for the tax administration to calculate your 2023 income tax.
This tax was then compared to the amount of your source tax collected throughout the year 2023.
 
Therefore, your Tax Notice 2024 tells you whether your income tax calculation 2023:
 
You are entitled to a refund (your source levy was too high in 2023 or you received tax reductions and credits),
 
Or a remainder to be paid (the amount deducted in 2023 from the source levy was not sufficient or you received an overpayment of tax reductions and credits at the beginning of 2024).
 
For online filers, you have this information at the end of your return.
 
If you are liable for an amount remaining to be paid in respect of your income tax in respect of the tax at source that you paid last year, the return also allows you to adjust your tax rate at source if necessary. Finally, it allows you to take into account any reductions or tax credits to which you can claim.
Will I be able to spread the remaining amount of my 2023 income?
 
If the amount remaining to be paid is more than €300, it will be automatically charged in 4 times from September to December 2024. If this amount is less than €300, it will be charged in September.
 
If you have not yet provided your bank details, consider doing so now and no later than the end of August.
If you have financial difficulties:
 
In some cases (licensing, death of spouse, long illness...) resulting in a deterioration of your financial situation, the tax administration may exceptionally and after studying your file, grant you a period of payment on the amount remaining to be paid.
 
In this case, you must, before the payment deadline specified on your notice, send a letter explaining your situation, supporting evidence, to your Public Finance Centre, accompanied by a deposit in good faith.
 
 
 
Self-employed: the single social and tax declaration
 
Do you report industrial or commercial profits (BICs), non-commercial profits (BNCs), agricultural profits (BAs) or other income from independent activities?
 
From now on, the income you declare on impots.gouv.fr is also taken into account when calculating your social contributions and contributions.
 
You no longer need to file a self-employed person's social declaration (SID) on the net-entreprises.fr website.
This unified tax and social tax return is a major simplification for self-employed workers and is a concrete translation of the "tell us once" approach, which aims to limit administrative procedures and facilitate the lives of insured persons and businesses. In 2023, the unified declaration was expanded to include contracted practitioners and medical assistants (PAM-C) and farmers, allowing 2.3 million users to declare at one time the income needed to calculate their social contributions and income tax.
 
Just complete your usual tax return on impots.gouv.fr and you will access your tax return, which will be completed with a specific "social" component 1
 
At the end of the return, the elements necessary for the calculation of personal social contributions and contributions will be transmitted automatically by the tax administration to the Urssaf or the Cgss, which will be able, as at present, to readjustment of the schedules of provisional contributions and adjustment to the final contribution.
 
This return is required, on a dematerialized basis, whether you are taxable or not.
Who is concerned?
 
Self-employed persons engaged in craft, industrial, commercial or liberal activities and affiliated with the general scheme of self-employed persons.
 
 
 
New:
In 2024, it is now possible to correct on-line the social data of your return in case of error or forgetfulness. Previously, it was necessary to file a paper amending declaration with your social contribution fund.
 
Self-entrepreneurs are not covered by the unified tax and social income tax declaration and, for the purposes of calculating their social contributions and contributions, retain their obligation to report their turnover or income, monthly or quarterly, to their Urssaf or Cgss.
 
At the end of March, an e-mail was sent by the DGFiP to inform the users concerned of their new reporting arrangements and the date of opening of the online service.
 
 
For more information, please contact:
 
We invite you to consult the section Individual > Reporting income > I am self-employed, I file only one tax and social income tax return.
1 - If the "Independent Income Tax Return" is not automatically selected, then you can check the box and see the "Social" part.
 
 
 
 
• Income from collaborative platforms
 
Carpooling, temporary rental of housing, sale of goods, clothing... Don't forget to check if you have to report them! These transactions, including occasional ones, are liable to be imposed and are subject to reporting obligations. Each year, the collaborative economy platforms transmit to the tax administration information about the income collected by their users.
What new obligations for these platforms?
 
The finance law for 2022 has transposed into French national law a European directive which imposes certain obligations on platform operators or the enforcement of relationships for the carrying out of transactions for the sale of property, the provision of a service by natural persons, the leasing of a mode of transport or the leasing of any real estate of any kind.
 
These obligations, which apply to transactions carried out on or after 1 January 2023, consist mainly of:
 
• to each of their users (seller or service provider) who have collected sums from transactions carried out through them and of which they are aware, an information document setting out, in particular, the number of transactions carried out in the previous year, the net amount received in respect of those transactions, and the amount of fees and charges levied by the platform;
 
The same information is given to their tax authorities.
 
These new provisions replace a previous scheme introduced in France between 2020 and 2023 with the same aims. Platform operators now declare the required information to the tax administration of the State in which they are established, the states in question then exchanging the information according to the place of residence of the sellers or providers carrying out transactions.
In concrete terms, how's it going for me?
 
If you received income from these platforms in 2023, you have to check whether they are taxable. In this case, you have to report them.
 
To find out if these revenues are taxable and in what category of income, use the summary statement of income from the transactions you received in 2023, which you had to receive from them, by e-mail, and visit our page:
 
How do I report my income from ancillary activities such as carpooling, rental of property or furnished housing...?
 
This will allow you to complete your income tax return, provided of course that the income in question is to be reported.
Please note:
 
If you have made transactions on certain platforms and this is not indicated to you in your online reporting journey, this does not mean that these revenues are not taxable. You have to verify this and, if applicable, report these revenues.
I am accompanied by the tax administration
 
Now, the amounts and number of transactions reported by collaborative platforms are listed on your reporting path.
 
In addition, if you declare online, a message will be presented to you as part of your reporting journey to accompany you, including access to the fact sheets published on our website that explain how to report revenues collected through online platforms or marketplaces.
Good to know:
 
A platform exemption is provided for income from the sale of second-hand goods between individuals, as well as in the case of "non-profit and cost-sharing" service with beneficiaries.
 
With regard to the sale of goods, the derogation applies provided that certain activity thresholds are not exceeded.
In practice, in order for the derogation to apply, the user must have carried out sales on the platform throughout the year for an amount less than or equal to €2,000 AND for a number of transactions less than 30. If the user has exceeded any of these two thresholds (more than €2,000 or 30 transactions or more), the platform must report the amounts in question to the tax administration.
 
In the case of cost-sharing activities, the derogation shall apply where the operator demonstrates in advance and on an annual basis that the mode of operation of its site does not allow providers offering the service to make a profit, i.e. to collect an amount which would exceed the amount of the direct costs incurred for the performance of that service which is the object of the cost-sharing to be distributed among the co-consumers, the part of the provider not included.
 
These thresholds and conditions apply only to platform operators for the purpose of complying with their reporting obligations to the administration to which they belong. They do not concern users and therefore do not prejudge the possible taxable nature of the sums declared by the platform which would exceed these thresholds, or contrary to the non-taxability of the sums which would not have been communicated by the platform under these same thresholds. Users are in all cases invited to consult the dedicated fact sheets available on the website impots.gouv.fr (cf. "In concrete terms, how is it going for me?", above).
 
 
 